Effect of floating-point precision and hardware on HRSC schemes

Abstract:

Much work has been put into accelerating CFD finite-volume HRSC codes by using GPUs
and their high memory bandwidth. GPUs tend to give better performance for single-precision
arithmetic than double-precision arithmetic, but the use of single-precision arithmetic should
be done only after a careful investigation of its impact on accuracy.

In this project, we look at the effect of using a range of hardware and parallelisation
approaches to quantify how solutions to the Euler and ideal-MHD systems of equations are
affected by the precision used to evaluate them.

Other code and hardware aspects that can be explored include compiler-flags, subtle
differences in Riemann solver tolerances or intervals.

Questions that can be explored include whether solution accuracy changes over time,
potentially of particular interest for MHD chaotic problems.

The code can be implemented within the AMReX framework (which allows easy compilation
for both single and double-precision floats), or stand-alone. AMR is not expected to be used
for this project, as profiling may be easier within a stand-alone code, and AMR adds more
complexity to accuracy-determination than would be expected within the given time.

This is largely a code development and exploration project.

Required Background

Essential courses:
   ●​ Numerical Methods for Compressible Fluid Dynamics
   ●​ Simulation of Matter under Extreme Conditions
   ●​ Programming with GPUs

Desirable courses:
   ●​ Scientific Programming in C++
   ●​ Software Design
   ●​ Data Visualisation Techniques
   ●​ Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMReX introduction)

Relevant Written Assignments

   ●​ Acceleration of CFD using CUDA (strongly recommended)
   ●​ Computational Magnetohydrodynamics (strongly recommended)
   ●​ Adaptive Mesh Refinement AMReX (not necessary; attendance at the AMReX
      lectures should be sufficient)

Project Plan
   -​   Select a second-order (at least) explicit finite-volume method using an approximate
        or exact Riemann solver to use throughout. MUSCL-Hancock is strongly suggested
        (SLIC alone is not suitable as the complexity of Riemann solvers will be of particular
        interest.)
   -​   Implement the Euler equations for an ideal-gas in two dimensions for both CPU and
        GPU frameworks, using an exact or approximate Riemann solver. The HLLC or the
        exact Riemann solver are most suitable. Use of the AMReX framework is advised
        due to its applicability to a range of hardware, but students may wish to write their
        own code which will be easier to customise and optimise.
   -​   Select test-cases likely to demonstrate variation in overall results across Riemann
        solvers and hardware. 1D tests from Toro [2013], two-dimensional Riemann
        problems, and shock-bubble tests are suggested.
   -​   Demonstrate any difference in results when running the same algorithm on different
        hardware, compared to either an exact solution (where available) or simply between
        hardware. The range and time-evolution of any differences will depend on the
        test-cases, hardware, and compiler and compiler-options.
   -​   Implement the Ideal-MHD equations, including a divergence-cleaning approach, in a
        similar framework to that for the Euler equations.
   -​   Choose suitable test-cases (e.g. Orszag-Tang and Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities) for
        Ideal-MHD.
   -​   Demonstrate how results for the same test-cases vary between CPU and GPU
        hardware. Perform a range of tests (in both 1D and 2D) and explore how the
        discrepancy between results varies as simulation time increases.
   -​   Consider the effect of some or all of the following on results:
            -​ Resolution of test-cases.
            -​ Floating-point precision (i.e. single or double) Quad precision may be
                achievable through libraries such as Boost::Multiprecision.
            -​ Compiler options such as -Ofast (gcc) or –use_fast_math (nvcc)
            -​ CPU architecture or vectorisation options such as -mtune.
            -​ Use of different numbers of MPI or OpenMP threads, or changes in
                thread/process scheduling.
            -​ Simple changes to Riemann solvers (such as the difference between SL <= 0
                and SL < 0 or tolerances in an exact Riemann solver) Note that these may
                only affect results when wave-speeds are very close to zero.
            -​ Any other approaches that occur to you that could affect simulation results
                without modifying the algorithm.
   -​   Draw conclusions about what your results mean for reproducibility between different
        implementations of the same algorithm on different hardware, compilers, or
        code-bases, even when following a published algorithm.

Tools

Some possibly useful tools are listed below. I have little experience with these, but it may be
worth investigating them as they will make exploring the multi-precision space much easier.

RAPTOR
The RAPTOR tool:
https://github.com/RIKEN-RCCS/RAPTOR

Is described in: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2507.04647v1

And is installed on the CSC network at: /lsc/opt/raptor​
requiring clang++-20 installed at: /lsc/opt/llvm-20.1

This will allow exploration of the effect of different floating-point precisions on the output of a
simulation.

Verificarlo

The Verificarlo tool:​
https://github.com/verificarlo/verificarlo

A tool for debugging and assessing floating point precision and reproducibility:​
https://ceec-coe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/iakymchuk.pdf

This is installed on the CSC network at:
/lsc/opt/verificarlo-2.4.0
Requiring clang++-18 installed at /usr/bin/clang++

See
https://github.com/verificarlo/verificarlo/wiki/Tutorials



References:

Explicit solvers and MHD are covered by Dr Stephen Millmore’s Advanced Continuum
Modelling (i) course.

1D Riemann tests:
E.F. Toro, “Riemann Solvers and Numerical Methods for Fluid Dynamics: A Practical
Introduction“, 2009, 3rd edition.

2D Euler Riemann tests:
R. Liska and B. Wendroff, “Comparison of Several Difference Schemes on 1D and 2D Test
Problems for the Euler Equations”, SIAM Journal on Sci. Comp., Vol 25 Issue 3 (2003)
https://doi.org/10.1137/S1064827502402120

MHD, GPUs, and Orszag-Tang test:
Bard and Dorelli, “A simple GPU-accelerated two-dimensional MUSCL-Hancock solver for
ideal magnetohydrodynamics”, JCP 259, 2014, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2013.12.006

D. Goldberg, “What Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating-Point Arithmetic”,
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/103162.103163
Project Report 1

Literature review and background [20%]
    ●​ Overview of Euler’s equations for compressible ideal-gas.
    ●​ Overview of the Ideal-MHD equations.
    ●​ Finite-volume schemes, basic overview of derivation.
    ●​ A brief discussion of floating-point arithmetic, and what effect different hardware,
        compiler options, and parallel-thread ordering may have on the result of simple
        expressions and algorithms.

Mathematical theory [20%]
   ●​ Description of the chosen explicit method, such as MUSCL-Hancock or WAF (must
      be Riemann-solver based).
   ●​ Discuss any numerical method variations specific to MHD (e.g. different Riemann
      solvers or divergence cleaning).
   ●​ Briefly summarise the points in the algorithms that could be varied in future
      investigations, such as < versus <= or any others thought suitable.

Code description [20%]
   ●​ Discussion of the AMReX (or other) framework that has been chosen, and how it
      allows ease of implementing multi-core CPU and GPU algorithms. If the student
      writes their own code from scratch, a discussion of what ease-of-implementation or
      optimization code features they have implemented is desirable.
   ●​ Discussion of what testing framework will be used to ensure all results are
      reproducible, and how ranges of modifications to compiler options or floating-point
      tolerances will be explored. The way in which the exact or appropriately-converged
      solution has been determined should also be discussed.

Validation [20%]
    ●​ Demonstration of correct results for at least four test-cases for Euler equations for
        ideal-gas, that include supersonic waves. This must include both 1D and 2D tests.
    ●​ Evaluation of these tests on both CPU and GPU.
    ●​ Comparison of results on CPU and GPU, quantifying any differences between the
        results.
    ●​ Compare the result accuracy between single and double precision.

Marks assigned for quality of write-up [20%]
   ●​ Quality of write-up covers report-structure and layout, as well as general spelling and
      grammar.
   ●​ Suitability and readability of any plots and tables included, such as captioning,
      labelling, etc.
   ●​ Completeness of the overall report.
   ●​ Suitability and quantity of references made.

Project Report 2

Project development [20%]
   ●​ As implementing all of the suggestions above covers a very wide range of
      possibilities, the student should describe how they will decide upon which changes to
      make to the methods in order to capture a representative range of the effects on
      accuracy in the time available.
   ●​ Include a discussion of the results from Report 1 and how this has informed
      subsequent project direction.

Computational Results [40%]

   ●​ Validation of CPU and GPU implementations for the MHD system.
   ●​ A systematic exploration of the accuracy (and perhaps performance) of the
      MUSCL-Hancock (or other) method on different hardware, with different compiler
      options, or slight differences in implementation should be carried out.
   ●​ If the difference between different implementations grows over time, quantify this.
   ●​ The above should be carried out for a range of different test-cases for both Euler and
      Ideal-MHD systems.

Conclusions and Future work [20%]

   ●​ Any conclusions from the above should be discussed.
   ●​ This may include a discussion of what changes to hardware, parallelisation,
      precision, and implementation have the most effect on the computed solution.
   ●​ Some indication of which test-cases were most affected by which changes could also
      be of interest.
   ●​ Discuss the effect on reproducibility between different implementations of the same
      algorithm on different hardware, compilers, or code-bases, even when following a
      published algorithm.

Marks assigned for quality of write-up [20%]
   ●​ Quality of write-up covers report-structure and layout, as well as general spelling and
      grammar.
   ●​ Suitability and readability of any plots and tables included, such as captioning,
      labelling, etc.
   ●​ Completeness of the overall report.
   ●​ Suitability and quantity of references made.
